Such a straightforward adventure. April 1917, the Western Front. A young soldier, Lance-Corporal Blake (Dean-Charles Chapman), is given a perilous mission. He’s to carry a message through No Man’s Land to a battalion of the Devonshires, countermanding an attack planned for the next day.

The Germans have just retreated to the Hindenburg Line — but aerial reconnaissance has revealed that their withdrawal is a trap. If the advance goes ahead 1,600 men may die, Blake’s brother amongst them. Cruelly, his commander, General Erinmore (Colin Firth), has chosen him for this task precisely because he has that desperate incentive. 

Blake takes with him just one other soldier, Lance Corporal Schofield (George McKay). Over the top they go into a blasted wasteland of barbed wire, corpses and shell craters, making their way deep into the German trenches. They discover the former front line has indeed been abandoned — but the dangers they face are just beginning. 

From the off the film is all forward motion, pursuing a linear narrative, relentlessly following our heroes in their race, though war-torn country, against the clock. 

To take us into their journey as immersively as possible it is all filmed from a single viewpoint, just one camera (or so it seems) following Blake and Schofield closely all the time like an invisible third party to the trip: sometimes retreating before them as they rush through a trench, sometimes following them intimately from behind, sometimes keeping up  alongside — only occasionally looking around to show us what they see. It’s the viewpoint used so effectively in László Nemes’s Auschwitz horror Son Of Saul.

And that’s not the only extreme stylisation. There are no apparent cuts or edits either, so that it all appears to be one long take, in the continuous present, uninterrupted, save for a single blackout. 

In fact filming (much of it on Salisbury Plain and in other British locations, supplemented by sets at Shepperton Studios) took 65 days in takes that lasted seven or eight minutes, later stitched together invisibly by the director of photography Roger Deakins and the editor Lee Smith. 

Given what can be done now with digital technology, simply joining scenes together like this so they seem continuous is perhaps not such a challenge? Yet the effect is much more powerful than superhero SFX splurging, persuading us we’re experiencing what happens in the film in an almost unmediated way. It’s especially suited to a story like this, a simple race to reach an objective before it is too late. There is an exhilaration to the sheer technical accomplishment on display; the staging of the film by director Sam Mendes is masterful throughout.

Yet there are drawbacks to this stunt too. As a viewer, you yearn for transition and punctuation — for editing, in fact. This flow of events is like a flow of prose without full stops, paragraphs or chapters. Not everything that happens on their journey is of equal interest, but it is of equal duration.  

Then there is that amazingly active, inquisitive camera, keeping pace with them. It’s clearly a great feat of agility from Roger Deakins, however it was done, whether the camera was handheld or motor-mounted, on cranes or on wires. Yet you do not need to be a cinematic pedant to find it distracting at times too. 

When Blake and Schofield painfully fight their way through the barbed wire barricades, the camera keeps up with them mysteriously unobstructed and you can’t help but wonder how? When Schofield is carried helplessly along in a cascading river, the camera is somehow right there next to him, rushing down stream too, yet not even splashed.

Never mind. The film is thrilling, moving on effectively from one shocking set piece to another, studding the narrative too with starry cameos — Andrew Scott as a cynical, dissolute Lieutenant, Mark Strong as a stern but sympathetic Captain, Benedict Cumberbatch as an angry, ambitious Colonel. 

The recreation of the battlefield is spectacular. Overall, the chase and mission aspects of this film make it much more eventful than we're used to in films set in the static trenches of the First World War — Sam Mendes has said that this mobility was precisely what attracted him to the story of getting a message through the lines. There are moments of running, firing and fighting when 1917 turns quite 007.  

Mendes dedicates the film to his grandfather, Alfred Mendes, who fought in the war, and he has incorporated his anecdotes. Yet, for all that it’s a great adventure, 1917 remains weirdly without larger historical context. With this story of individuals heroically trying to stop a doomed attack, to save a brother indeed, all the larger questions about the war are nattily sidestepped. There’s some predictable chippiness about the value of medals and the inhumanity of senior officers — but no wider perspective. 

In interview, Mendes and his co-scriptwriter Krysty Wilson-Cairns have tried to conjure an audience who do still need to be told about the heroism and horror of the First World War: those Brexiteers who have allegedly been hijacking our history. Mendes has said: “I feel very strongly that, during that time in history, we were fighting for a free and unified Europe, which is something we would do well to remember at the moment.”

Wilson-Cairns, a horror and comic-book writer, has a little more broadly observed that the war was “the stupidest thing humanity ever did to each other. But although it was misguided, those men were also fighting for a free and united Europe. And somehow that’s under threat again, out of sheer madness and folly and political gain. Peace is so tenuous. I pray to God we don’t have the same outcome.”

Thus they would recruit the film to contemporary causes. Somehow our heroes are combating Brexit. Ridiculous! Nevertheless it’s a terrific performance all round, deserving all the prizes it’ll take.